# Data Structures 1 - Spring 2025 - Assignment A1

## EXERCISE 1: Min-Heap [20-points]

## 1. Representation Invariant and Abstraction Function

- Representation: Heap<T>: <A: array; size: int>
- Representation invariant: RI(R) = $0\leq R.\text{size}\leq |R.A| \quad \&\& \quad\forall 0 < i < |A|, A[\lfloor (i-1)/2 \rfloor] \leq A[i]$.
- Abstraction Function(AF): $Abs(R) = Abs(R, 0) $ where:

$Abs(R,i) = \begin{cases}\langle R.A[i],Abs(R,2*i+1), Abs(R,2*i+2)\rangle & \text{if } i\leq R. \text {size} \\ \text {Nil} & \text{if } i > R.\text{size} \end{cases}$

## 2. Checking the Representation Invariant

check the files `minHeapCheckRep_01.java ` and `minHeapCheckRepTest_01.java`

## 3. MIN-HEAPIFY

```pseudocode
left(i){
	return 2*i+1
}

right(i){
	return 2*i+2
}

MIN-HEAPIFY(Q, i){
	k = i
	invalidMinheap = true
	while(k < Q.size and invalidMinheap){
		l = left(k)
		r = right(k)
		if(l <= Q.size and Q.A[k] > Q.A[l])
			min = l
		else 
			min = k
		if(r <= Q.size and Q.A[min] > Q.A[r])
			min = r
		if(min != k)
			exchange Q.A[k] and Q.A[min]
			k = min
		else invalidMinheap = false
	}
}
```

## 4. MIN-HEAPIFY Complexity Analysis

The iterative version of MIN-HEAPIFY(Q, i) running cost is proportional to the height of the heap. 

The worst case is that MIN-HEAPIFY  will perform at each level of the heap to move the node from the root of the heap to a leaf. The height of the heap is h, which means that there are h levels in the heap. Then the complexity is O(h).  Since a heap of n elements is based on a complete binary tree, its height h is $log n$. Therefore the complexity is $O(log n)$.

## 5. Correctness Proof

Define subtree(k) that asserts the subtree rooted at index k. 

1. **Contract :** 

    **Pc :** 0 <=i <= Q.size <=|Q.A| && subtree(left(i)) and subtree(right(i)) are min-heaps.

    **Pc' :** 0 <=i <= Q.size <=|Q.A| && subtree(left(i)) and subtree(right(i)) are min-heaps && k = i && invalidMinheap = true.

    **inv :** i <= k <= Q.size && subtree(left(k)) and subtree(right(k)) are min-heaps && in subtree(i), only  Q.A[k] and its children may violate the min-heap property && the rest of the heap(except subtree(k)) remain unchanged. && (invalidMinheap = true || invalidMinheap=false).

    **Qc' :** (k = Q.size ||  invalidMinheap = false) &\& subtree(i) is a min-heap && the rest of the heap remains unchanged.

    **Qc : **subtree(i) is a min-heap && the rest of the heap remains unchanged.

2. **Correctness** **Proof** : 

    1. **Initialization :** Assume that `pc'` holds, we need to prove that `pc'` implies `inv` : 
        - From `0 <= i <= Q.size <= |Q.A| and k = i`, we can get `i <= k <= Q.size`.
        - From `k = i`and subtree(left(i)) and subtree(right(i)) are min-heaps, we can get that subtree(left(k)) and subtree(right(k)) are min-heaps. 
        - From `k = i`, we know subtree(k) = subtree(i). We are not sure if the subtree(i) is a min-heap.
        - Since we haven't executed this loop, the heap remains unchanged.
        - invalidMinheap = true.

    2. **Maintenance : **Assume `Inv` && `B`, show `Inv`.

        - Name k~0~ the old value of k, l~0~ = left(k~0~), r~0~ = right(k~0~), l = left(k), r = right(k).

        - Inv && B = {i <= k~0~ <= Q.size && subtree(l~0~) and subtree(r~0~) are min-heaps && in subtree(i), only Q.A[k] and its children may violate the min-heap property && the rest of the heap(except subtree(k~0~)) remain unchanged && k~0~ < Q.size && invalidMinheap =true}

        - If min = k~0~, k = k~0~ < Q.size according to the loop. Then we can get  i <= k <= Q.size, subtree(l) = subtree(l~0~), subtree(r) = subtree(r~0~), and subtree(k) = subtree(k~0~). Since subtree(l~0~)) and subtree(r~0~)) are min-heaps, then subtree(l) and subtree(r) are also min-heaps. And since k = k~0~ = min, then subtree(k) is a min-heap. We do not do any operation on the heap in this iteration, then the heap remains unchanged. Since min = k~0~, then invalidMinheap = false.

        - l~0~ = 2*k~0~ + 1 >= 0 and r~0~ = 2\*k~0~ + 2 >= 0 since k~0~ >= 0. 

            If min = l~0~ or r~0~, k = min = l~0~ or r~0~. Since we know that one of the conditions to make min = l~0~ (or r~0~)  is l~0~ <= Q.size (or r~0~ <= Q.size), then we can get i <= k <= Q.size.

            Suppose k = l~0~, then subtree(l) = subtree(left(l~0~)), subtree(r) = subtree(right(l~0~)). By the Inv, the old subtree(l~0~) was a min-heap. Since subtree(l) and subtree(r) are subtree of the old subtree(l~0~) and we only swapped Q.A[l~0~] and Q.A[k~0~], then subtree(l) and subtree(r) are also min-heaps, only subtree(k) may not obey the min-heap property, and the rest of the heap remains unchanged. Since we swapped Q.A[l~0~] and Q.A[k~0~], then if the Q.A[k] is the minimum value among Q.A[k], Q.A[l], and Q.A[r],  the subtree(k) is a min-heap, otherwise it is not. In this case, invalidMinheap = true.

            Similarly for min = r~0~.

    3. **Termination : **Assume `Inv` && `not B`, show `Qc'`.

        - not (k < Q.size && invalidMinheap = true) implies (k >= Q.size || invalidMinheap = false).
        - From Inv, we know i <= k <= Q.size. If k >= Q.size, then k = Q.size.
        - If invalidMinheap = false, then invalidMinheap = false.
        - k = Q.size meaning subtree(k) = null. It implies subtree(i) obeys the min-heap property.
        - invalidMinheap = false meaning min = k. It implies subtree(k) is a min-heap, and then subtree(i) obeys the min-heap property.
        - From Inv, the rest of the heap remain unchanged.

​		